EUROENGEO 2024 4th European Regional Conference of IAEG DOI: https://doi.org/10.5592/CO/EUROENGEO,2024.257 SOIL INVESTIGATIONS AS A CORNERSTONE FOR GEOTECHNICAL DESIGN OF LIQUEFACTION MITIGATION MEASURES BELOW LEVEES MARIO BACIC!, KATARINA ANDACIC?, KENNETH GAVIN?, KOSTA URUMOVIC* ' University of Zagreb, Faculty of Civil Engineering, Croatia, mbacic@grad.hr, ? Center of Faculty of Civil Engineering ltd, Croatia, kandacic@grad.hr 3 TU Delft, the Netherlands, K.G.Gavin@tudelft.nl # Croatian Geological Survey, Croatia, kurumovic@hgi-cgs.hr Abstract Levees are particularly susceptible to damage during seismic events, and failure mechanisms can involve large deformations due to soil liquefaction within and below the levee. To assess the liquefaction potential below the levees, and for the purpose of planning liquefaction mitigation measures, in-situ and/or laboratory investigations must be carried out. This is a challenge, especially due to the great length of the levees, and the limited financial and time resources available for carrying out the investigations. This paper provides an insight into two examples of investigation work carried out to determine the liquefaction potential and gives an overview of the design measures to remediate the underlying soil. These are the PuS¢cine levee in Medimurje County, which was reconstructed due to insufficient height in terms of flooding, and the Hrastelnica levee in Sisak-Moslavina County, which was damaged in the 2020 Petrinja earthquake. While numerous dynamic penetration tests were carried out on the PuS¢ine levee to assess the liquefaction potential, Hrastelnica levee assessments relied on the static (cone) penetration tests. The paper further discusses step forward in mapping the spatial variability of liquefaction potential under the levees, through the efforts of ongoing LeveeLiq project. Key words liquefaction, levee, soil investigation works, remediation design, LeveeLiq project 1 Introduction As one of the consequences of the strong Petrinja earthquake in 2020, liquefaction occurred in large parts of Sisak—Moslavina County, whose geology is generally characterized by saturated, poorly graded sands and silty sands (Pollak et al., 2021). In the Rapid Damage Assessment Report (Republic of Croatia, 2021), it was estimated that liquefaction occurred on almost 1600 ha of the county area at varying depths from 3 to 15 m. All liquefaction zones are located in the alluvial deposits of the Kupa, Sava, Glina and Maja rivers at a maximum distance of about 1 km from the riverbanks. About 7% of the area affected by liquefaction is located under the levees. This was detected by numerous cracks in the ground surface and erupted sand, as well as numerous cracks and deformations of the levees (Figure 1). The levee deformations shown correspond well with the levee damage patterns D-2 and D-3 of Oka et al. (2012) (Figure 2), which were detected after the magnitude 9.0 Tohoku earthquake in 2011 in Japan, where damage to the levees was recorded at 2,115 locations. These patterns include longitudinal cracking and lateral expansion of the levee slope near the toe, as well as settlement of the levee crest. The authors state that the associated damage is due to liquefaction of the foundation soil, liquefaction of the soil in the levees as the water-saturated area was above ground level, and the long duration of this huge earthquake, or a combination of the above factors. 218 EUROENGEO 2024 4th European Regional Conference of IAEG og, hs 1 ow ye I am . : op is aa Le 7 Ga bats Au ™ Figure 1. Deformed levees as a consequence of earthquake - induced liquefaction in Sisak — Moslavina County settioment of fhe top of the shoulder and the crown — settlement of the toe of the bank lateral expansion ~~, | heaving D-3 D-1 ~, , Repco eee eee -~ ~~ settlement of crown divison of the bank due Co cracks longitudinal cracks boiled sand lateral expansion of the toe of the bank lateral expansion / ” PS of the toe of the Dank \ \ . | Io pg ee \ 1-2 Figure 2. Typical damage and failure patterns of river embankments, modified from Oka et al. (2012) Even though the water levels of adjacent rivers were not high enough to flood a large area, the likelihood of a cascade of earthquakes and floods put those responsible for flood protection infrastructure on alert. Therefore, in the aftermath of the earthquake, much attention was focused on how to mitigate the risks associated with liquefaction for future earthquake events. It was soon recognized that the focus should be on adequate and comprehensive investigations that would provide mitigation designers quantitative information on the liquefaction potential of the soil below the levees. The interest of geotechnical practitioners in an optimal soil investigation campaign arose not only for the reconstruction of the levees damaged by the 2020 Petrinja earthquake, but also for levees in other seismically active regions of Croatia, as the high risks of levee failure increase the need for reliable assessments. This raises the crucial question of the type and frequency of investigation methods to assess the liquefaction potential below the network of existing or future levees. This paper presents the efforts to assess the liquefaction potential below the two levees - PuScine in Medimurje County and Hrastelnica in Sisak — Moslavina County. While the PuScine levee is being reconstructed because it does not meet the requirements for extreme water height, the Hrastelnica levee is one of the levees that was severely damaged in the aforementioned earthquake in Petrinja in 2020. 2 Methods for assessing the liquefaction potential Conducting soil investigations along levees to assess liquefaction potential is both expensive and time consuming due to a combination of technical, logistical and legal factors. Because the inherent variability of soil makes it difficult to predict the behavior of each individual layer during an earthquake, interpreting the data and results of various tests often requires a high degree of engineering judgment, leading to subjectivity and variability in assessment outcomes. Therefore, it 1s desirable to use a combination of different methods to gain a more complete insight into the liquefaction risk in a given area. 219