EUROENGEO 2024 4th European Regional Conference of IAEG DOI: https://doi.org/10.5592/CO/EUROENGEO.2024.266 CHARACTERIZING THE CPT RESPONSE AND PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF FLUVIALLY DEPOSITED PLEISTOCENE SAND IN THE NETHERLANDS FENNA VAN AARLE ', KEVIN DUFFY *, KAY KOSTER °, DOMINIQUE NGAN-TILLARD *, RONALD HARTING °, FREEK BUSSCHERS® ' Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, fennavaarle@gmail.com ? Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, k.duffy@tudelft.nl 3 TNO Geological Survey of the Netherlands, The Netherlands, kay.koster@tno.nl # Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, d.j.m.ngan-tillard@tudelft.nl > TNO Geological Survey of the Netherlands, The Netherlands, ronald.harting@tno.nl ° TNO Geological Survey of the Netherlands, The Netherlands, freek.busschers@tno.nl Abstract Understanding the geological and geotechnical characteristics of the shallow subsurface 1s crucial for engineering decisions in densely populated regions like the Netherlands. Urban areas are for a large part built on a complex stack of sand, clay, silt, gravel and organics that were deposited over the last hundreds of thousands of years under gradually subsiding tectonic conditions. One of these units, a fluvially deposited sand known as the Kreftenheye Formation, is widespread across the western part of the country and is vital for foundation design and groundwater dynamics. The Kreftenheye Formation is therefore well described by geotechnical and geological tests, yet integrating both types of data has rarely been done on a nationwide scale. This paper focuses on 76 pairs of Cone Penetration Tests and boreholes that include Kreftenheye, out of a full database of nearly 200 pairs from TNO - Geological Survey of the Netherlands, generally reaching depths up to 40 meters. The study reveals significant spatial variations and depositional patterns within the Kreftenheye Formation, illustrating how overlying or interlayered flood plain or soft channel lag sediments influences the response of the CPT. Furthermore, CPT response and borehole samples have helped with making geological distinctions between the upper, Weichselian part of the Kreftenheye Formation and the lower Saalian part, showing how integrating both datasets can give both geological and geotechnical insights. Key words CPT, soil variability, granular soil, particle size distribution, Late Pleistocene, fluvial sand 1 Introduction In the Netherlands, a fluvially deposited Middle and Late Pleistocene sand, known as the Kreftenheye Formation, is widespread across the country and the Dutch North Sea Sector (Busschers et al., 2007; TNO-GSN, 2024). In the heavily populated coastal and river areas of the Netherlands, the formation is typically overlain by clay and peat of Holocene age (Ngan-Tillard et al., 2010; Koster et al., 2018). Consequently, most infrastructure and buildings are founded on piles. These foundation piles are driven through the overlying soft sediment, transferring most of the load to the stiff sands of the Kreftenheye Formation. Nevertheless, the formation poses some engineering challenges. The formation is generally dense to very dense, with Cone Penetration Test (CPT) tip resistances reaching more than 80 MPa in parts. Getting piles to their target depth whilst avoiding refusal and pile damage can therefore be challenging (de Git et al., 2019; Duffy et al., 2024). Furthermore, weak zones within this layer can bring unexpected changes in the pile installation resistance, as well as affecting the ultimate capacity of the pile. 51 EUROENGEO 2024 4th European Regional Conference of IAEG Traditionally, many studies focus on the geological characterization of formations, often missing out on important patterns revealed by geotechnical data such as CPTs (Busschers et al., 2005; TNO-GSN, 2024). Conversely, CPT focused research and industry practices may disregard the geological origin of deposits and overlook essential insights into the formation's history and potential risks (Robertson, 2016;Mayne, 2017). By integrating both geological and geotechnical perspectives, a more comprehensive understanding of subsurface conditions can be achieved, leading to better-informed engineering decisions. This research addresses this integration gap by analysis of a dataset of nearly 200 CPTs and borehole pairs from the TopIntegraal drilling and measurement program provided by TNO — Geological Survey of the Netherlands (Buma et al., 2024), generally penetrating the shallow subsurface up to depths of ~40 meters. This paper presents this analysis, showing the geological and geotechnical patterns and variations within the Kreftenheye Formation and how the integration of geological and geotechnical knowledge can lead to more effective engineering designs. 2 Depositional history of the Kreftenheye Formation The Kreftenheye Formation was deposited by the river systems Rhine and Meuse in the Netherlands, commencing during the late Middle and Late Pleistocene, spanning approximately 160,000 to 12,000 years ago (Busschers, 2008; Peeters et al, 2015; Verbraeck, 1983; Weerts and Busschers, 2003). This timeframe encompasses the late Saalian (cold climate, glaciation), Eemian (warm climate), Weichselian (cold and temperate climate), and Holocene (warm climate) periods, each characterized by distinct climate conditions and sea levels (Figure 1). c i D> | row beet od 300.000-130.000 years ago 130.000-115.000 vears ago a Giacial deposits blauvial deposits Marine deposits Weichselian 115,000-11.700 vcars ago Figure 1. Simplified paleogeographical maps of the Netherlands during the late Saalian, Eemian, and Weichselian periods. Adapted from Busschers et al. (2007) and Wong (2007). 52